[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The holistic world of healing
includes plants and herbs
channeling energy, as well as
both spiritual and physical
modalities.
Healers are
multi-dimensional beings
who dance between the realms
of the seen and unseen.
These individuals
have the ability
to facilitate a shift in
people, offering them insight
and support, reconnecting people
with themselves and the greater
collective, healing the
world one person at a time,
healing from the other side.
>> [WHISPERS]
>> I got a lot of
visitors today.
They don't get enough
opportunity to come out.
I need to calm them down.
>> Sangomas are a channel
between the physical world
and the afterlife.
When opening the channel to
generations of ancestors,
sangomas are often
consumed, and the ancestors
take full possession in order
to convey their message.
[GRUNTS]
>> I'm going to have to
pour myself with water.
[WHISTLING]
[GROANS]
I'm sorry.
I need this one to
come and help me.
[NON-ENGLISH]
[TICKING]
OK.
This doesn't happen often.
So unfortunately, one of the
reasons that I don't normally
go into ceremonies
with other healers
is that my ancestors
normally come through.
If one comes through, a whole
lot of them they come through.
So I needed my sister to
come and calm them down a bit
and tell them that not to come
all at once because then I'd
get overwhelmed.
If we had allowed them or given
them the space to communicate,
it would have taken
the whole day.
Hence, I needed my sister to
at least come through and speak
to them.
I know I don't look
the same anymore.
It's one of the
things those things
that happen because
you need somebody
to come through and
communicate with them
who is not in the similar
space that I'm in.
My spiritual and
traditional healing name
is Lebonw, which means light.
I have been a trained
traditional and spiritual
healer for the past 17 years.
I had my calling in
2003 after reading.
Three weeks later sitting
at home minding my business,
I went into a trance.
That was like
literally my daily life
for the whole year in 2003.
I did not understand that
because before then, I
had never been exposed to
healers at all because I come
from a Christian background,
although we're not staunch
because we still would do
an annual ancestral ceremony
at home, which I only
later discovered that it
was my father's way of asking
ancestors to give me more time.
So it was when he stopped doing
the annual ceremonies that they
came through actually.
I come from a
lineage of healers.
But in my family,
it's bigenerational.
Normally from on my maternal
side, it skips a generation.
And then on my
father's side, it's
a mess because a
whole lot of them
ran away from the calling,
a whole lot of them
Escaped with my
great grandfather,
who is one of my
main ancestors who
is bringing forward my gifts.
And my other aunt, my
father's sister opted to die.
Her thinking was that
their father ran away
from their calling, leaving
them with these things,
and he's not interested.
So in the beginning
of my journey,
it was very difficult
because I think they also
recognized that the
reason that I was sick
and my calling was
as intense as it was
was because they ran
away from their gifts.
My family did not
understand because it
had skipped many generations.
So they did not understand--
they did not understand
me going into a trance
because I would speak in
a male voice, I would cry,
and I would scream.
It has been a journey which has
taken me to different places,
because I've been
exposed to healers
who are traditional healers
who have gone through--
who have gone through
initiations, who
have been initiated by people.
I've also been
exposed to healers
who had stayed up in the
mountains for years being
initiated by their ancestors.
So a better part of my
journey has been solely
guided by ancestors
because I was never
one who was supposed to
go to initiation school
to be initiated by anyone.
So the moment I
finished my initiations,
my ancestors undertook
for me to complete.
And I'm still not
even done half of--
I'm not using half of my gifts.
>> Sangomas are traditional
healers and play an important
role in South Africa's society.
To become a sangoma, one has
to answer to their calling.
The Indigenous
knowledge that they
are given through
dreams and visions
is passed down
through their lineage.
The wisdom they possess is
ancient and highly respected
in their communities.
It is through divine teachings
while at initiation school
that they go through a
spiritual transformation that
prepares them for their life's
purpose that of a sangoma.
Coming up next, we meet a woman
who struggled for many years.
And we learn how
Keketso has helped her
on her healing journey.
We also go muti shopping
with Keketso in preparation
for their next session.
Join us as we journey with
them to the other side.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Tabitha came in for a reading
beginning of the year 2000.
And it was a lot actually
what she was going through.
The moment I saw
her, I said to her,
"Girl, something
is wrong with you."
And she would get
burns around her skin.
She was being
spiritually attacked.
But as well, it
was because she had
gone through an initiation
that didn't go well.
So that we needed to put
her ancestors properly.
We needed to heal them because
her calling had been messed up.
So as a result, it opened her
up to a lot of spiritual attacks
because she was not grounded.
It was very humbling to
heal her because I had never
healed someone who
was going through what
she was going through.
And I remember the
first day that we
went to do her cleansing,
we got into a car accident.
And the chicken that
was supposed to help
to cleanse her with ran away.
So it was a bit of a journey.
But ultimately, she's
OK, although she's still
going through a bit of
issues, but she's much better.
She has healed.
I had not seen
Tabitha in a while.
She had been
avoiding me actually.
She had been avoiding me
because she resigned from work
after I told her not to.
So when I needed to take a
client to the river and client
that didn't have a
car and asked Tabitha
to come to help me with that, to
help me drive her to the river.
So this is only when she managed
to come through and tell me
what has been
happening in her life.
So what we will be doing today
is we will be actually trying
to figure out how to help her,
because she has been struggling
to find a job for a while, to
see where the blockages are,
and what do we need
to do to move forward?
But already, she has been
told that she needs to go back
to Manguzi, which
is [NON-ENGLISH]..
This is where I took
her in 2019 for prayers.
So just before she
lost her job, she
was told that we needed to go
back to Manguzi for prayers
and rituals and ceremonies.
So we are going to
have to figure out
a way to have our ancestors
show some mercy on her
so that she gets a job
because it's Manguzi
is about eight hours away.
It's on the border of
Northern KZN and Mozambique.
>> Often, sangomas believe
that physical ailments are
a manifestation of a
spiritual upset or neglect
of the ancestors.
So that is what they
would address first.
After that, once the
ancestors have been heard,
the sangoma is guided
by the ancestors
on what the physical illness
is and how to treat it.
The sangoma will also ask the
candidate a lot of questions
so they can find out
if the illness is also
related to social or
environmental factors.
>> So I was following her
on Facebook for some time.
I finally got to know
her in person in 2019
when she advertised her
business on Facebook.
When we met, she told
me-- she asked me
what was wrong with
my skin because I
had these red blotches all
over my skin, especially
my face and the arms in
all the sun exposed areas.
And then I told her
that it's the side
effects of the medication
that I was taking.
And then she told me that
no, she doesn't think so.
But it's up to me.
What do I think about it?
And then we did
our first reading,
and then she actually
confirmed that
it was actually a curse
We went through my
reading, and what
actually made me
come to her it was
after a series of misfortunes.
I'm not sure whether
it's misfortunes
of the things that were not--
Things that weren't
understandable.
And then we took it from there.
And then I also had
this thing, this itch
from underneath my skin.
It felt like I was burning
underneath my skin.
And then I would scratch it.
And then when I
scratch it, I would
get some blister-like things
on my skin all over my body.
And then they would
quickly turn into dirt.
That was the beginning
of our journey.
It took us the whole of
2019 to do all of that.
There was just a lot
that was happening
trying to treat everything.
So today, I'm going to
have a session with Ms. K.
To find out properly
what is happening.
And because there's
actually been
things that aren't working.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Indigenous and traditional
medicine often involves herbal
concoctions and infusions.
Although sangomas heal on a
psychological and interpersonal
level, they also use the
guidance of the ancestor
spirits to prescribe muti.
This muti is a combination of
herbs or natural substances
that are prepared
in a specific way.
The brew is then
taken as prescribed.
There are muti markets around
South Africa where sangomas
can go to stock up on supplies.
Coming up next, Keketso
channels the ancestors
and provides our candidate
with some insights
through the divination
of bone throwing.
Join us as we journey with
them to the other side.
[GROWLING]
>> What do you see?
>> I can hear people
singing from a distance.
>> And what are they singing?
>> The song they are
singing speaks of
how being ill is so painful.
That is the only part of
the song I understand.
>> Often during a divination, a
sangoma may burn an herb called
impepho to assist in
communicating with
the ancestor's spirits.
They may also throw
bones, either that
of sacrificed animals or stones,
shells, or other significant
found objects.
Each bone has a
meaning and represents
part of the candidate's life.
The ancestors tell the sangoma
what to say, through the bones.
>> Do you see how bad
this is, you situation?
There's a creature
literally sitting on you.
So you see how every how
everything is blocked--
>> Mm-hmm.
>> --as if you're surrounded
by entities, dark entities.
That every single thing, every
attempt that you try and--
to unblock things,
it does not help.
Your people are saying that
we are trying to communicate,
we are trying to show
her a lot of things
that she needs to do
in order to fix what's
happening in her
life, but it feels
like she does not hear us.
It feels like what has been
done it's like a separation when
somebody has--
when you have been
separated from your luck,
that you're no longer
accessing your luck.
But you can see that there
is a lot of light there,
but you are not reaching it.
You're not accessing it.
>> Yeah.
>> You are worse than where you
were when you started honestly.
>> Yes I am.
>> The time that you were not
you were not doing any work,
it has opened you up a lot
considering that you know
the amount of battles that you
were fighting and the amount
of battles that we have
fought to get you here.
It feels like you have
survived, but you've
survived to suffer
and to struggle
not necessarily to thrive.
But all will be right [CHANTING]
The bones say you need to
go where two roads meet,
so you need to find
a place like that
so that you get there and
and do all your prayers
and your rituals there.
Even if it's not a
road per se, but it
has to be-- as long
as people walk there
and there roads meet.
You always find
places like that, yes.
So you should speak to
them to open up your path.
>> OK.
>> So we threw some bones.
We had a bone
reading with Tabitha,
which is quite new for
her because I normally
use my intuition.
And she believes that
the bones limit me.
So when she first came in, as
I was doing the incantations
inviting the ancestors
to come through
and asking my ancestors to
bring forward her ancestors so
that we can have a conversation
so I can see that and get
messages and get clear messages
and communications from them,
she went into a trance.
And she said that she could hear
them singing one of the songs,
one of the healing songs that
says [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] which
means that most of her
issues are around her calling
because when one has a calling,
it manifests differently.
Other people get
really physically ill.
Other people go into trances.
Other people have problems and
ending issues in their lives.
So her ancestors
were coming through
to say that much as there are
other issues that she still
needs to attend to her calling.
And there are a
lot of ceremonies
that she needs to perform
at home to bring them
forward so that they give her
clarity in terms of what needs
to happen along her journey
because she has a calling,
and she's gone
through initiations.
So she went into
a trance, and she
could hear them singing in
the background, which was also
positive because it also shows
that her ancestors are also
very comfortable in my space.
They're comfortable
enough to come through
and to also communicate
and send messages.
It was beneficial
because then she
knew something was
not right but did not
know how to go about
sorting out the issues.
So we figured out
the gaps that need
to be filled in order
for her to move forward
to find another job.
And in terms of traveling
and spiritual journeys,
to remove a few obstacles
along her way though,
she said that she
gets a bit of clarity.
So basically what
we just did today
was just to see
where everything is
and what work needs to
be done in order to help
her sort out her issues.
>> We did a bones
reading with Miss K.
I actually prefer her doing
the other side than the bones
because I feel like the
bones they just limit her.
However I got what
I wanted to hear.
She gave me herbs
or medicine to use,
to help where I am right now.
So that things can
get back to normal.
So that I will be able
to get work and remove
all the bad energies
that hinder my progress.
I've seen that in
reality, being spiritual
can stall your
progress in life, when
you don't take it seriously.
You have to open your
heart when you practice,
do it wholeheartedly so
that that they see you
have given in to your calling.
I did get a lot of
help and healing.
And now I know what
to do going forward.
The steps that she
has told me to take.
I need to go to to the
forest and doing my rituals,
and do all those things so
that I'm aligned and balanced
with my people.
Also she said, if you don't
practice you leave open up
yourself to other things,
mostly negative things
such as bad energies.
And it's not necessarily
they're picking on you.
It's just that the space that
you are in at that particular
moment they cannot see you.
Your ancestors can't see you or
access you due to interference.
They cannot access you because
of the energies and everything
the shadows or bad
energy around you.
So we will work on
that going forward.
And I know that there
will be progress
and that something positive will
come out of it, because it's
something I've done before.
It's just that you
get sidetracked
along the way because
of various things.
As much as it's hard to
have your ancestors here,
there are a lot of positives.
Things are better like this.
So yeah, we just need
to balance everything.
By cleansing myself,
I'm also cleansing them
so that they can function
better in my space.
>> There are over 200,000
sangomas in South Africa,
and a large percent of the
population confide in them
to overcome illness and social
problems and challenges.
Across the world,
healers and shamans
have varying forms and methods.
But one thing weaves
them together,
their ability to tap into
energy and the spirit world
to channel it and
use it to heal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]